README.md, before:

# UI8Kit Framework

**Zero-Overhead UI System for Rapid Prototyping & Static Site Generation**

A design-system-first React component library with strict utility props, semantic CSS output, and brandbook-ready static generation. Inspired by shadcn's component philosophy and Spectre CSS's minimal JavaScript approach.

## Philosophy

> **Every line of code must justify its existence.**

UI8Kit is built on three core principles:

1. **Constrained by Design** — Limited Tailwind subset, no arbitrary values
2. **CSS-First Interactivity** — `:checked`, `:target`, `:focus-within` over JavaScript
3. **Semantic Output** — `data-class` attributes for meaningful CSS selectors

## Key Features

### Smart Utility Props

Props map directly to Tailwind classes with strict TypeScript validation:

```tsx
// Props are the first part of the Tailwind class (before the hyphen)
<Box bg="primary" text="lg" p="4" rounded="lg" />
//    ↓           ↓         ↓      ↓
// bg-primary  text-lg    p-4   rounded-lg

// Only values from utility-props.map.ts are allowed
<Stack gap="6" items="center" justify="between" />
//     ↓          ↓              ↓
//   gap-6   items-center   justify-between
```

**No modifiers. No arbitrary values. No exceptions.**

```tsx
// ❌ FORBIDDEN - modifiers in props
<Box col="span-1 lg:span-3" />

// ✅ CORRECT - single values only
<Box col="span-1" className="lg:col-span-3" />
```

### Curated Class Whitelist

Instead of Tailwind's 1000+ utilities, UI8Kit uses a ~500-class whitelist:

```json
{
  "border-l": "border-left-width: 1px;",
  "bg-primary": "background-color: var(--primary);",
  "text-muted-foreground": "color: var(--muted-foreground);",
  "gap-6": "gap: calc(var(--spacing) * 6);"
}
```

Every class is:
- Mapped to pure CSS3 properties
- Available in both `@apply` and semantic modes
- Validated at compile time

### Design Tokens (shadcn-style)

CSS custom properties for consistent theming:

```css
:root {
  --background: hsl(0 0% 97.2549%);
  --foreground: hsl(240 3.3333% 11.7647%);
  --primary: hsl(187.4739 173.4032% 31.3580%);
  --primary-foreground: hsl(0 0% 100%);
  --muted: hsl(0 0% 94.1176%);
  --accent: hsl(203.9916 96.5418% 93.6698%);
  --radius: 0.625rem;
  --spacing: 0.25rem;
}

.dark {
  --background: hsl(0 0% 7.0588%);
  --foreground: hsl(0 0% 87.8431%);
  /* ... dark mode overrides */
}
```

### CSS-Only Interactivity

Following Spectre CSS's philosophy — minimal JavaScript, maximum CSS:

```css
/* Accordion using :checked */
.accordion-toggle:checked ~ .accordion-content {
  max-height: 500px;
  opacity: 1;
}

/* Tabs using :target */
.tab-content:target {
  display: block;
}

/* Dropdown using :focus-within */
.dropdown:focus-within .dropdown-menu {
  opacity: 1;
  visibility: visible;
}
```

### Semantic HTML5 Architecture

```tsx
// Blocks generate proper semantic HTML
<Block component="section" data-class="hero-section">
  <Stack gap="6" items="center">
    <Title text="4xl">Welcome</Title>
    <Text text="muted-foreground">Description</Text>
  </Stack>
</Block>
```

Output:
```html
<section data-class="hero-section" class="relative">
  <div data-class="stack" class="flex flex-col gap-6 items-center">
    <h1 data-class="title" class="text-4xl font-bold">Welcome</h1>
    <p data-class="text" class="text-muted-foreground">Description</p>
  </div>
</section>
```

## Dual CSS Output

### Mode 1: Tailwind `@apply`

```css
.hero-section {
  @apply relative;
}

.hero-title {
  @apply text-4xl font-bold;
}
```

### Mode 2: Pure CSS3 (Semantic)

```css
.hero-section {
  position: relative;
}

.hero-title {
  font-size: var(--text-4xl);
  font-weight: 700;
}
```

Both modes are generated from the same `ui8kit.map.json` class mapping.

## Zero Unused CSS

The generator includes UnCSS integration:

```typescript
uncss: {
  enabled: true,
  htmlFiles: ['./dist/html/**/*.html'],
  ignore: [':hover', ':focus', '.dark', ':root'],
}
```

Result: **Only CSS actually used in your HTML** — up to 77% reduction.

## Component Architecture

```
src/
├── components/ui/     # Primitives (strict props only)
│   ├── Box.tsx        # Base container
│   ├── Stack.tsx      # Flex column layout
│   ├── Text.tsx       # Typography
│   ├── Button.tsx     # Interactive button
│   └── ...
├── components/        # Composites (className + data-class allowed)
│   ├── Card.tsx
│   ├── Accordion.tsx
│   └── Sheet.tsx
├── blocks/            # Page sections (semantic HTML5)
│   ├── HeroBlock.tsx
│   └── FeaturesBlock.tsx
├── layouts/           # Page structure
│   └── DashLayout.tsx
└── variants/          # CVA variant definitions
    ├── button.ts
    └── badge.ts
```

## Quick Start

```bash
# Clone and install
git clone https://github.com/user/ui8kit-framework
cd ui8kit-framework
bun install

# Development (Vite + HMR)
cd apps/web
bun run dev

# Generate static site
bun run generate
```

## Roadmap

### shadcn-Style Examples

We plan to provide extensive copy-paste examples like shadcn/ui:

- Dashboard layouts
- Authentication forms
- Data tables
- Marketing sections
- E-commerce components

### CSS-Only Components

Following Spectre CSS's minimal-JS philosophy:

- [ ] Accordion (`:checked`)
- [ ] Tabs (`:target`)
- [ ] Dropdown (`:focus-within`)
- [ ] Modal (`:target`)
- [ ] Tooltip (`:hover` + `::after`)
- [ ] Toggle (`:checked` + `::before`)

## Project Structure

```
ui8kit-framework/
├── apps/
│   ├── web/           # Static site generator demo
│   └── docs/          # MDX documentation
├── packages/
│   ├── generator/     # Static site generator
│   └── mdx-react/     # MDX processing
└── .cursor/rules/     # Architecture documentation
```

## Why UI8Kit?

| Feature | UI8Kit | Tailwind | shadcn/ui |
|---------|--------|----------|-----------|
| Curated classes | ✅ ~500 | ❌ 1000+ | N/A |
| Pure CSS output | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| Smart props | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| Semantic selectors | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| CSS-only interactivity | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| Static generation | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| Design tokens | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| TypeScript validation | ✅ | ❌ | ✅ |

## Use Cases

- **Rapid Prototyping** — Constrained props prevent bikeshedding
- **Brand Guidelines** — Curated whitelist enforces consistency
- **Static Sites** — Semantic HTML + optimized CSS
- **Design Systems** — Token-based theming
- **Email Templates** — Pure CSS3 output (inline mode)

## Related Documentation

- [Generator Package](packages/generator/README.md)
- [Web App Example](apps/web/README.md)
- [Docs App Example](apps/docs/README.md)
- [Engine Pipeline Guide](apps/engine/PIPELINE.md)
- [Engine README](apps/engine/README.md)
- [Architecture Rules](.cursor/rules/architecture.mdc)
- [UI8Kit Props Rules](.cursor/rules/ui8kit.mdc)

## Domain Navigation Rules (Internal)

For domain-specific builds (`website`, `docs`, `examples`, `dashboard`), keep navigation deterministic:

- Route source of truth: `packages/data/src/fixtures/shared/page.json`
- UI internal links: use `DomainNavButton` (engine partial)
- Custom checks: `context.resolveNavigation(href)` / `context.navigation.isEnabled(href)`
- Policy mode: soft only -> render disabled state with tooltip `Not available in this domain build`
- Validate after sync: `bun run validate:data-bundle -- --target <app>`

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Update package.json scripts for engine focus, enhance README for local development, and refactor data handling for admin context. Remove examples and docs references, streamline sidebar link caching, and improve test coverage for admin routes.

README.md, after:

# UI8Kit Framework

**Zero-Overhead UI System for Rapid Prototyping & Static Site Generation**

A design-system-first React component library with strict utility props, semantic CSS output, and brandbook-ready static generation. Inspired by shadcn's component philosophy and Spectre CSS's minimal JavaScript approach.

## Philosophy

> **Every line of code must justify its existence.**

UI8Kit is built on three core principles:

1. **Constrained by Design** — Limited Tailwind subset, no arbitrary values
2. **CSS-First Interactivity** — `:checked`, `:target`, `:focus-within` over JavaScript
3. **Semantic Output** — `data-class` attributes for meaningful CSS selectors

## Key Features

### Smart Utility Props

Props map directly to Tailwind classes with strict TypeScript validation:

```tsx
// Props are the first part of the Tailwind class (before the hyphen)
<Box bg="primary" text="lg" p="4" rounded="lg" />
//    ↓           ↓         ↓      ↓
// bg-primary  text-lg    p-4   rounded-lg

// Only values from utility-props.map.ts are allowed
<Stack gap="6" items="center" justify="between" />
//     ↓          ↓              ↓
//   gap-6   items-center   justify-between
```

**No modifiers. No arbitrary values. No exceptions.**

```tsx
// ❌ FORBIDDEN - modifiers in props
<Box col="span-1 lg:span-3" />

// ✅ CORRECT - single values only
<Box col="span-1" className="lg:col-span-3" />
```

### Curated Class Whitelist

Instead of Tailwind's 1000+ utilities, UI8Kit uses a ~500-class whitelist:

```json
{
  "border-l": "border-left-width: 1px;",
  "bg-primary": "background-color: var(--primary);",
  "text-muted-foreground": "color: var(--muted-foreground);",
  "gap-6": "gap: calc(var(--spacing) * 6);"
}
```

Every class is:
- Mapped to pure CSS3 properties
- Available in both `@apply` and semantic modes
- Validated at compile time

### Design Tokens (shadcn-style)

CSS custom properties for consistent theming:

```css
:root {
  --background: hsl(0 0% 97.2549%);
  --foreground: hsl(240 3.3333% 11.7647%);
  --primary: hsl(187.4739 173.4032% 31.3580%);
  --primary-foreground: hsl(0 0% 100%);
  --muted: hsl(0 0% 94.1176%);
  --accent: hsl(203.9916 96.5418% 93.6698%);
  --radius: 0.625rem;
  --spacing: 0.25rem;
}

.dark {
  --background: hsl(0 0% 7.0588%);
  --foreground: hsl(0 0% 87.8431%);
  /* ... dark mode overrides */
}
```

### CSS-Only Interactivity

Following Spectre CSS's philosophy — minimal JavaScript, maximum CSS:

```css
/* Accordion using :checked */
.accordion-toggle:checked ~ .accordion-content {
  max-height: 500px;
  opacity: 1;
}

/* Tabs using :target */
.tab-content:target {
  display: block;
}

/* Dropdown using :focus-within */
.dropdown:focus-within .dropdown-menu {
  opacity: 1;
  visibility: visible;
}
```

### Semantic HTML5 Architecture

```tsx
// Blocks generate proper semantic HTML
<Block component="section" data-class="hero-section">
  <Stack gap="6" items="center">
    <Title text="4xl">Welcome</Title>
    <Text text="muted-foreground">Description</Text>
  </Stack>
</Block>
```

Output:
```html
<section data-class="hero-section" class="relative">
  <div data-class="stack" class="flex flex-col gap-6 items-center">
    <h1 data-class="title" class="text-4xl font-bold">Welcome</h1>
    <p data-class="text" class="text-muted-foreground">Description</p>
  </div>
</section>
```

## Dual CSS Output

### Mode 1: Tailwind `@apply`

```css
.hero-section {
  @apply relative;
}

.hero-title {
  @apply text-4xl font-bold;
}
```

### Mode 2: Pure CSS3 (Semantic)

```css
.hero-section {
  position: relative;
}

.hero-title {
  font-size: var(--text-4xl);
  font-weight: 700;
}
```

Both modes are generated from the same `ui8kit.map.json` class mapping.

## Zero Unused CSS

The generator includes UnCSS integration:

```typescript
uncss: {
  enabled: true,
  htmlFiles: ['./dist/html/**/*.html'],
  ignore: [':hover', ':focus', '.dark', ':root'],
}
```

Result: **Only CSS actually used in your HTML** — up to 77% reduction.

## Component Architecture

```
src/
├── components/ui/     # Primitives (strict props only)
│   ├── Box.tsx        # Base container
│   ├── Stack.tsx      # Flex column layout
│   ├── Text.tsx       # Typography
│   ├── Button.tsx     # Interactive button
│   └── ...
├── components/        # Composites (className + data-class allowed)
│   ├── Card.tsx
│   ├── Accordion.tsx
│   └── Sheet.tsx
├── blocks/            # Page sections (semantic HTML5)
│   ├── HeroBlock.tsx
│   └── FeaturesBlock.tsx
├── layouts/           # Page structure
│   └── DashLayout.tsx
└── variants/          # CVA variant definitions
    ├── button.ts
    └── badge.ts
```

## Quick Start (Local UNIX)

```bash
# Clone and install
git clone https://github.com/user/ui8kit-framework
cd ui8kit-framework
bun install

# Development (Vite + HMR)
cd apps/engine
bun run dev

# Run local quality checks
cd ../..
bun run quality:local
```

## Roadmap

### shadcn-Style Examples

We plan to provide extensive copy-paste examples like shadcn/ui:

- Dashboard layouts
- Authentication forms
- Data tables
- Marketing sections
- E-commerce components

### CSS-Only Components

Following Spectre CSS's minimal-JS philosophy:

- [ ] Accordion (`:checked`)
- [ ] Tabs (`:target`)
- [ ] Dropdown (`:focus-within`)
- [ ] Modal (`:target`)
- [ ] Tooltip (`:hover` + `::after`)
- [ ] Toggle (`:checked` + `::before`)

## Project Structure

```
ui8kit-framework/
├── apps/
│   └── engine/        # Main presentation app + generator source
├── packages/
│   ├── data/          # Source-of-truth fixtures + typed context
│   ├── generator/     # Static site generator pipeline
│   ├── blocks/        # UI blocks and page views
│   ├── core/          # Core primitives and helpers
│   ├── lint/          # DSL and repository linting
│   ├── mdx-react/     # MDX processing
│   └── template/      # Template primitives
└── .cursor/rules/     # Architecture documentation
```

## Why UI8Kit?

| Feature | UI8Kit | Tailwind | shadcn/ui |
|---------|--------|----------|-----------|
| Curated classes | ✅ ~500 | ❌ 1000+ | N/A |
| Pure CSS output | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| Smart props | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| Semantic selectors | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| CSS-only interactivity | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| Static generation | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| Design tokens | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| TypeScript validation | ✅ | ❌ | ✅ |

## Use Cases

- **Rapid Prototyping** — Constrained props prevent bikeshedding
- **Brand Guidelines** — Curated whitelist enforces consistency
- **Static Sites** — Semantic HTML + optimized CSS
- **Design Systems** — Token-based theming
- **Email Templates** — Pure CSS3 output (inline mode)

## Related Documentation

- [Generator Package](packages/generator/README.md)
- [Engine Pipeline Guide](apps/engine/PIPELINE.md)
- [Engine README](apps/engine/README.md)
- [Architecture Rules](.cursor/rules/architecture.mdc)
- [UI8Kit Props Rules](.cursor/rules/ui8kit.mdc)

## Domain Navigation Rules (Internal)

For domain-specific builds (`website`, `admin`), keep navigation deterministic:

- Route source of truth: `packages/data/src/fixtures/shared/page.json`
- UI internal links: use `DomainNavButton` (engine partial)
- Custom checks: `context.resolveNavigation(href)` / `context.navigation.isEnabled(href)`
- Policy mode: soft only -> render disabled state with tooltip `Not available in this domain build`
- Validate after sync: `bun run validate:data-bundle -- --target <app>`

## Domain Model And Invariants

- Domain set is fixed to `website` and `admin` in `packages/data/src/fixtures/shared/page.json`.
- Dynamic routes are explicitly modeled as `/guides/:slug` and `/blog/:slug`.
- `@ui8kit/data` is the only source for runtime context consumed by engine blocks/layouts/routes.
- Route/domain changes must be applied consistently in fixtures, context exports, scripts, and tests.

## License

GPL-3.0
